---
layout: syllabus
published: true
categories: teaching
tags: syllabi cuny

type: syllabus
title: Queer Performativity
location: Duke
creation_date: 1993

description: none

display_data:
    - {k: title, v: Title}
    - {k: location, v: Location}
    - {k: creation_date, v: Date}

related_media:
    - {type: image, format: pdf, src: Queer-Performativity_pdf.pdf, public: true}
    - {type: text, format: txt, src: Queer-Performativity_ocr.txt, public: false}

---

h3. Queer Performativity: Duke, 1993

Monday, August 30: Introduction  
Monday, September 6:  JL Austin, How to Do Things With Words  
Monday, September 13: Michel Foucault, History of Sexuality vol. 1. Also read (on reserve): Ann Cvetkovich, 'Theorizing Affect: Twentieth-Century Mass Culture Criticism,' from her Mixed Feelings: Feminism, Mass Culture, and Sensationalism, pp 26-44  
Friday, September 17: 'The Unhappy Performative,' Lecture by Timothy Gould, 4:10 (room TBA) (read: Sophocles, Antigone)  
Sunday, September 19, 1:00 pm. Potluck brunch with Timothy Gould. My house: 2726 Montgomery St., Durham NC, 27705  
Monday, September 20: Meeting with Timothy Gould. Esther Newton, Mother Camp. Look at (on reserve) David Bergman, ed., Camp Grounds: Style and Homosexuality (bound page proofs)
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Bibliographies: Camp; affect/shame  
Monday, September 27: Judith Butler, Gender Trouble OR Bodies That Matter (which should be available at Regulator Bookstore)  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Bibliographies: psychoanalysis; deconstruction; analytic philosophy  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;sometime this week (TBA): Sandra Bernhard, Without You Iím Nothing  
Monday, October 4: SueEllen Case, Performing Feminisms. And read performance theory packet (on reserve).  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Bibliographies: Performance theory; pornography and the 'sex wars'  
Monday, October 11: Harriet Jacobs, Incidents in the Life of a Slave Girl. Also read (on reserve): Joseph R. Roach, 'Slave Spectacle and Tragic Octoroons: A Cultural Genealogy of Antebellum Performance,' Theatre Survey 33.2, Nov 1992, 167-187.  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Bibliographies: Nazi holocaust; trauma  
    
FALL BREAK

Monday, October 25: Henry David Thoreau, On Civil Disobedience  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Bibliographies: rhetoric of social movements; linguistics  
Monday, November 1: 'Donít Ask Donít Tell' packet (on reserve)  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;Bibliographies: pragmatism; critical legal studies  
Thursday, November 4: Lecture by Neil Hertz, place/time TBS  
Monday, November 8: Frantz Fanon, Black Skin, White Masks  
Thursday, November 11: Lecture by Andrew Parker place/time TBA  
Monday, November 15: Meeting/lecture with Don Belton. James Baldwin, Go Tell It On the Mountain. (Additional recommended reading: James Baldwin, Just Above My Head)  
Tuesday, November 16: Performance/reading by Don Belton place/time TBA  
Monday, November 22: CP Cavafy, Collected Poems  
Monday, November 29: Conclusion  

Annotated Bibliography/review essay topics:  
performativity in/and:  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;camp  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;affect/shame  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;psychoanalysis  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;deconstruction  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;analytic philosophy  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;performance theory  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;pornography and the 'sex wars'  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;responses to Nazi holocaust  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;trauma  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;rhetoric of social movements  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;linguistics  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;pragmatism  
&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;critical legal studies  