---
layout: resource
published: true
nav: resources
category: links
type: resource

title: Commentaries
---

h5. COMMENTARIES 

<b>Conferences</b>

"(newwindow)The Honoring Eve Symposium: Feminism and Queer Theory":http://www.bu.edu/honoringeve/about-the-symposium/
Ed Cohen, Lee Edelman, Jonathan Flatley, Jonathan Goldberg, Bill Goldstein, Katy Hawkins, Joseph Litvak, Heather Love, Michael Moon, Tavia Nyong’o, Cindy Patton, Siobhan Somerville, Carolyn Williams. Boston University 2009.

"(newwindow)After Eve":http://supervalentthought.com/2010/03/18/after-eve-in-honor-of-eve-kosofsky-sedgwick/
Lauren Berlant, Tyler Curtain, Maurice Wallace, and Robyn Wiegman. Duke University 2010.

"(newwindow)When Feminism Rules: Assessing Governance Feminism Projects from the International to the Local":http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=RMx6X2ZD8dY
Janet Halley. Boston University School of Law 2013.


<b>By Eve Sedgwick</b>

"(newwindow)Sedgwick Sense and Sensibility":http://nideffer.net/proj/Tvc/interviews/20.Tvc.v9.intrvws.Sedg.html
Interview by Mark Kerr and Kristin O'Rourke in <i>Thresholds: Viewing Culture</i>, 1995. 

"(newwindow)Jane Austen and the Masturbating Girl":http://criticalinquiry.uchicago.edu/uploads/pdf/Sedgwick,_Jane_Austen_and_the_Masturbating_Girl.pdf
PDF of article in <i>Critical Inquiry</i>, 1991.


<b>Book Reviews</b>

"(newwindow)Between Men":http://ir.uiowa.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1120&context=wwqr 
C. Carroll Hollis in <i>Walt Whitman Quarterly</i>, 1986.

"(newwindow)Tendencies":http://www.nytimes.com/1993/12/26/books/proclivities-of-criticism.html
Karla Jay in the <i>New York Times</i>, 1993. 

"(newwindow)Touching Feeling and Regarding Sedgwick":http://www.lrb.co.uk/v25/n05/elaine-showalter/vibrating-to-the-chord-of-queer
Elaine Showalter in <i>London Review of Books</i>, 2003.

"(newwindow)The Weather in Proust":http://www.lambdaliterary.org/reviews/04/15/the-weather-in-proust-by-eve-kosofsky-sedgwick/
Chase Dimock in <i>Lambda Literary</i>, 2012.


<b>Other</b>

Mary M. Alcaro, "(newwindow)My Dear Holmes: Examining Sedgwick’s Theory of Homosociality in The Sign of Four":http://www.academia.edu/2123334/My_Dear_Holmes_Examining_Sedgwicks_Theory_of_Homosociality_in_The_Sign_of_Four on Academia.edu.

Emily Apted, "(newwindow)New Conjunctions":http://www.bu.edu/honoringeve/files/2009/09/eve-kosofsky-sedgwick-artforumcom-_-in-print.pdf in <i>Art Forum</i>, 2009.

Lauren Berlant, "(newwindow)Eve Sedgwick, Once More":http://criticalinquiry.uchicago.edu/uploads/pdf/Berlant,_Sedgwick_Once_More.pdf in <i>Critical Inquiry</i>, 2009.

Gavin Brown, Kath Browne, Michael Brown, Gerda Roelvink, Michelle Carnegie, and Ben Anderson, "(newwindow)Sedgwick's Geographies: Touching Space":http://www.academia.edu/1013147/Sedgwicks_geographies_Touching_space in <i>Progress in Human Geography</i>, 2011.

Jane Hu, "(newwindow)I'm Nobody: Eve Sedgwick After Death":http://www.theawl.com/2013/05/eve-sedgwick-after-death in <i>The Awl</i>, 2013.

Vincent Quinn, "(newwindow)Loose reading? Sedgwick, Austen and critical practice":http://www.academia.edu/1465010/Loose_reading_Sedgwick_Austen_and_critical_practice_-_edited_version on Academia.edu.

Maria Russo,"(newwindow)The reeducation of a queer theorist: Battling cancer, a nice male psychoanalyst and her own sexual demons, the diva of queer theory learned a new way of living":http://www.salon.com/1999/09/27/sedgwick/ in <i>Salon</i>, 1999.

Dinitia Smith, "(newwindow)'Queer Theory' Is Entering The Literary Mainstream":http://www.nytimes.com/1998/01/17/books/queer-theory-is-entering-the-literary-mainstream.html?pagewanted=all&src=pm in the <i>New York Times</i>, 1998. 

Philomila Tsoukala, "(newwindow)Reading A Poem Is Being Written":http://www.law.harvard.edu/students/orgs/jlg/vol331/339-348.pdf in <i>Harvard Journal of Law and Gender</i>, 2010.

J. Keith Vincent, "(newwindow)Imitation and Desire in Sedgwick and Soseki":http://www.academia.edu/3673395/Imitation_and_Desire_in_Sedgwick_and_Soseki in <i>Proceedings of the Association for Japanese Literary Studies</i>, 2010.


Back to "LINKS":http://evekosofskysedgwick.net/links/