---
layout: resource
published: true
nav: resources
category: Tendencies at Twenty Symposium
type: resource

title: Introduction

    
---

p(intro). This text is not yet available. 

Tendencies at Twenty (University of York, February 14 2013).

Tendencies at Twenty was an interdisciplinary afternoon symposium to celebrate the birthday of Eve Kosofsky Sedgwick’s ground-breaking, paradigm-shifting, multi-generic, queer-theoretical masterpiece. Timed also to celebrate Valentine’s Day and LGBTIQ History month, the seminar saw speakers and participants coming from Leeds, Dundee, Manchester, Oxford, Norwich, Newcastle, London, Brighton and Manhattan. The day comprised three panels, ‘Queer Tutelage’, ‘Crossing of Discourses’ and ‘Across Genders and Sexualities’ with each panel dealing with a single section of the book, and each five-to-ten minute position paper dealing with a single chapter of the book, or in the case of the first and last papers, with two, closely related chapters of the book. The speakers came from a variety of disciplinary and methodological perspectives, including English and Related Literature, Film Studies, Art History, and German Studies, and I encouraged each to respond in any register or genre that they chose. Below you will find pdfs of each of the papers as they were given on the day, as well as an audio recording of much of the proceedings, including the question and answer sections of each panel and the plenary discussion at the end of the day. 
Jason Edwards (University of York)
<a class="email">Jason.Edwards[a]york.ac.uk</a>


copy and paste above, html (select) below

<p class=MsoNormal style='margin-left:28.35pt;text-indent:-28.35pt;line-height:
150%'><b><i><span lang=EN-GB style='font-size:12.0pt;line-height:150%'>Tendencies
at Twenty </span></i></b><b><span lang=EN-GB style='font-size:12.0pt;
line-height:150%'>(University of York, February 14 2013).</span></b></p>

<p class=MsoNormal style='margin-left:28.35pt;text-indent:-28.35pt;line-height:
150%'><span lang=EN-GB style='font-size:12.0pt;line-height:150%'>&nbsp;</span></p>

<p class=MsoNormal style='line-height:150%'><i><span lang=EN-GB
style='font-size:12.0pt;line-height:150%'>Tendencies at Twenty </span></i><span
lang=EN-GB style='font-size:12.0pt;line-height:150%'>was an interdisciplinary
afternoon symposium to celebrate the birthday of Eve Kosofsky SedgwickÕs<i> </i>ground-breaking,
paradigm-shifting, multi-generic, queer-theoretical masterpiece. Timed also to
celebrate ValentineÕs Day and LGBTIQ History month, the seminar saw speakers
and participants coming from Leeds, Dundee, Manchester, Oxford, Norwich,
Newcastle, London, Brighton and Manhattan. The day comprised three panels, ÔQueer
TutelageÕ, ÔCrossing of DiscoursesÕ and ÔAcross Genders and SexualitiesÕ with
each panel dealing with a single section of the book, and each five-to-ten
minute position paper dealing with a single chapter of the book, or in the case
of the first and last papers, with two, closely related chapters of the book.
The speakers came from a variety of disciplinary and methodological
perspectives, including English and Related Literature, Film Studies, Art
History, and German Studies, and I encouraged each to respond in any register
or genre that they chose. Below you will find pdfs of each of the papers as
they were given on the day, as well as an audio recording of much of the
proceedings, including the question and answer sections of each panel and the
plenary discussion at the end of the day. </span></p>

<p class=MsoNormal align=right style='text-align:right;line-height:150%'><span
lang=EN-GB style='font-size:12.0pt;line-height:150%'>Jason Edwards (University
of York)</span></p>

<p class=MsoNormal align=right style='text-align:right;line-height:150%'><span
lang=EN-GB><a href="mailto:Jason.Edwards@york.ac.uk"><span style='font-size:
12.0pt;line-height:150%'>Jason.Edwards@york.ac.uk</span></a></span></p>