---
layout: resource
published: true
nav: resources
category: links
type: resource

title: Other
---

h5. Other links


<b>APPRECIATIONS, 2009</b>
"(newwindow)In the Garden, for Eve":http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=F5YBYitzpD8
A short animated movie by Brian Selznick and David Serlin made in honor of Eve Kosofsky Sedgwick. Starring Marcel Proust and Jane Austen. 
"(newwindow)Alex Patchin McNeill, Presbyqueerian":http://presbyqueerian.com/2009/04/14/epistemology-of-the-theorist/
"(newwindow)Richard Kim, <i>The Nation</i>":http://www.thenation.com/blog/eve-kosofsky-sedgwick-1950-2009#axzz2bbobm54d


<b>APPRECIATIONS, After 2009</b>
"(newwindow)Jane Hu, The Awl":http://www.theawl.com/2013/05/eve-sedgwick-after-death. May 2, 2013. 


<b>OBITUARIES</b>
"(newwindow)Tetu":http://tetu.yagg.com/2009/04/13/mort-de-lintellectuelle-eve-kosofsky-sedgwick/


<b>INTERVIEWS</b>
"(newwindow)Sedgwick Sense and Sensibility":http://nideffer.net/proj/Tvc/interviews/20.Tvc.v9.intrvws.Sedg.html:
By Mark Kerr and Kristin O'Rourke, January 19, 1995.

<b>RECORDINGS OF SEDGWICK</b>
"(newwindow)Q & A - 1":http://blip.tv/sf-online/eve-kosofsky-sedgwick-comments-1-3091554 
"(newwindow)Q & A - 2":http://blip.tv/sf-online/eve-kosofsky-sedgwick-comments-2-3091566
From the conference, "Writing a Feminist's Life: The Legacy of Carolyn G. Heilbrun," Columbia University, February 11, 2005.


<b>RELATED SITES</b>

h5. Conferences and Symposia

"(newwindow)Honoring Eve":http://www.bu.edu/honoringeve/about-the-symposium/, annual symposium, Boston University. 
"(newwindow)Supervalent Thought":http://supervalentthought.com/2010/03/18/after-eve-in-honor-of-eve-kosofsky-sedgwick/, blog by Lauren Berlant. Talks from "After Eve: In Honor of Eve Kosofsky Sedgwick," Duke University, February 25, 2010. 

h5. Other

"(newwindow)University of York, department of Art History":http://www.york.ac.uk/history-of-art/news-and-events/news/2013/kosofsky-sedgwick-resource/
"(newwindow)Gender as Performance and Script":http://www.huffingtonpost.com/g-roger-denson/yvonne-rainer-cindy-sherm_1_b_873652.html: Reading the Art of Yvonne Rainer, Cindy Sherman, Sarah Charlesworth and Lorna Simpson After Eve Sedgwick and Judith Butler. By G. Roger Denson, Huffington Post, June 9, 2011.
Upcoming book:"(newwindow)Reading Eve Kosofsky Sedgwick: Gender, Sexuality, Embodiment":http://www.academia.edu/479200/Reading_Eve_Kosofsky_Sedgwick_Gender_Sexuality_Embodiment  by Michael O'Rourke.



<b>REVIEWS AND COMMENTARY</b>

h5. A Dialogue on Love

"(newwindow)SALON":http://www.salon.com/1999/09/27/sedgwick/. By Maria Russo, September 27, 1999.

h5. Epistemology of the Closet

"(newwindow)In relation to Queer Theory":http://chelm.freeyellow.com/queer_theory.html

h5. The Weather in Proust

"(newwindow)Lambda Literary":http://www.lambdaliterary.org/reviews/04/15/the-weather-in-proust-by-eve-kosofsky-sedgwick/ By Chase Dimock, April 15, 2012.

h5. Articles

"(newwindow)Retrospective of Sedgwick's articles in Critical Inquiry":http://criticalinquiry.uchicago.edu/%20featured_author_eve_kosofsky_sedgwick. By Lauren Berlant. 
"(newwindow)Jane Austen and the Masturbating Girl":http://criticalinquiry.uchicago.edu/%20featured_author_eve_kosofsky_sedgwick. From <i>Critical Inquiry</i>


Back to "LINKS":http://evekosofskysedgwick.net/links/