---
layout: book
published: true
nav: archive
category: writing
sub-category: "books edited"
type: book

type: book
role: editor
with: Adam Frank
title: Shame and Its Sisters
sub-title: A Silvan Tomkins Reader

editions:
    - description:  none
      publisher:    Duke University Press
      location:     "Durham, N.C."
      series:       none
      date:         1995
      binding:      none
      notes:        none
      translations: none
      isbn:         none
      further_editions: none

amazon_url:     none
indiebound_url:    www.indiebound.org/book/9780822316947
worldcat_url:        none

cover_img:      shameanditssisters.jpg
description:    none

display_data:
    - {k: title, v: Title}
    - {k: publisher, v: Publisher}
    - {k: publication_date,  v: Publication Date}

---

The question of affect is central to critical theory, psychology, politics, and the entire range of the humanities; but no discipline, including psychoanalysis, has offered a theory of affect that would be rich enough to account for the delicacy and power, the evanescence and durability, the bodily rootedness and the cultural variability of human emotion.

Silvan Tomkins (1911–1991) was one of the most radical and imaginative psychologists of the twentieth century. In _Affect, Imagery, Consciousness_, a four-volume work published over the last thirty years of his life, Tomkins developed an ambitious theory of affect steeped in cybernetics and systems theory as well as in psychoanalysis, ethology, and neuroscience. The implications of his conceptually daring and phenomenologically suggestive theory are only now -- in the context of postmodernism -- beginning to be understood. With _Shame and Its Sisters_, editors Eve Kosofsky Sedgwick and Adam Frank make available for the first time an engaging and accessible selection of Tomkins’s work. 

Featuring intensive examination of several key affects, particularly shame and anger, this volume contains many of Tomkins’s most haunting, diagnostically incisive, and theoretically challenging discussions. An introductory essay by the editors places Tomkins’s work in the context of postwar information technologies and will prompt a reexamination of some of the underlying assumptions of recent critical work in cultural studies and other areas of the humanities. The text is also accompanied by a biographical sketch of Tomkins by noted psychologist Irving E. Alexander, Tomkins’s longtime friend and collaborator. --_From the jacket copy_

"The editors make available for the first time an accessible selection of Tomkins’ work. Featuring intensive examination of several affects, particularly shame and anger, this volume contains many of Tomkins’ most haunting, diagnostically incisive, and theoretically challenging discussions." --_International Journal of Psychology_