---
layout: document
published: true
nav: archive
category: teaching
sub-category: courses
type: document
title: "Proust II"

meta:
    - {key: type, value: document, display-value: Type, display: true, sort: true}
    - {key: title, value: Proust II, display-value: Title, display: true, sort: false}
    - {key: location, value: CUNY, display-value: Location, display: true, sort: true}
    - {key: creation-date, value: 2006, display-value: Date, display: true, sort: false}

description: none

related_media:
    - {type: image, format: pdf, src: Queer-Performativity_pdf.pdf, public: true}
    - {type: text, format: txt, src: Queer-Performativity_ocr.txt, public: false}

formats:
    - {type: image, format: pdf, src: Queer-Performativity_pdf.pdf, public: true}
    - {type: transcript, format: html}
    - {type: text, format: txt, src: Queer-Performativity_ocr.txt, public: false}

---

Eve Kosofsky Sedgwick

English 87100, Spring 2006
Class hours: Tues. 6:30-8:30.


Required texts:
For ease of discussion, all students are required to use the new translation of Proust edited by Christopher Prendergast (individual translations by Lydia Davis et al.). Either the British (Viking) or U.S. (Penguin) edition of this translation is fine, though their pagination may differ by two or three pages. (Please note that Volumes V and VI are unavailable in this country; you can buy them in Britain through amazon.co.uk, but leave plenty of time to get them.) Those who wish to may supplement the translation by reading along in French.

Marcel Proust, ??In Search of Lost Time vol. IV, Sodom and Gomorrah??, tr. John Sturrock
Marcel Proust, ??In Search of Lost Time vol. V, The Prisoner??, tr. Carol Clark, and The Fugitive, tr. Peter Collier 
Marcel Proust, ??In Search of Lost Time vol. VI, Finding Time Again??, tr. Ian Patterson


Readings: 
1)  All page numbers below are for the British (Viking) edition -- may be off by a couple of pages from U.S. (Penguin) edition.
2) Please don’t read the introductions to each volume -- they contain plot spoilers!

January 31:	Sodom and Gomorrah (aka Cities of the Plain), through the end of the party at the Prince de Guermantes’s (pp. 5-129)
February 7:	To the end of Pt. II, ch. 1 (pp. 129-183)
February 14:	Ch. 2, up to arrival at La Raspalière (pp. 184-297))
February 21.     NO CLASS
February 28:	To mention of  “Parmi les hommes” (pp. 297-439)
March 7:	To end of book (439-522)
March 14:	The Captive, pp. 3-102 (through Albertine’s sleep)
March 21:	Pp. 102-244 (through Saniette’s stroke)
March 28:	The Captive and The Fugitive, pp. 244-482, to end of Aimé’s letter
April 4:	Pp. 244-587, to end of Ch. 2
April 11:	Pp. 588-658 (to end)
April 18:	NO CLASS
April 25:	Finding Time Again, up to Charlus’s goodnight (pp. 3-117)
May 2:		Pp. 117-226, up to return to party
May 9: 	Up to “Meanwhile, at the other end of Paris”  (pp. 226-304).
May 16: 	Pp. 304-358–to end.  Chinese dinner after class.
May 23: 	All papers due.							

Question Sets: For each class meeting, two students will sign up to prepare questions that will be used to guide the discussion of that week’s reading.  Please note that these are not to be formal presentations, much less papers delivered orally, but catalysts for seminar discussion.  The two students should discuss and coordinate their questions in advance.

Final Papers: Open topic.  Although you have the full range of the novel to discuss, please remember that you retain last semester’s option for fragmentary, open, and/or experimental ways of organizing your writing for this project.  Please discuss your plans for this paper with me, early and often.
