---
layout: post
published: true
nav: blog
category: blog
type: post

tags: events

description: none

title: "A Valentine’s Day celebration of Sedgwick’s poetry"

related-images:
    - panda-k-blog

---
The University of York has announced two events that continue a tradition of celebrations of Eve’s work begun last year with their conference on _Tendencies_.

“To celebrate Queer History Month, Valentine's Day, and the twentieth anniversary of the publication of _Fat Art, Thin Art_, the Centre for Modern Studies is delighted to host an afternoon soirée to discuss Eve Kosofsky Sedgwick as a poet. The afternoon will feature a number of short position papers on different aspects of Sedgwick's poetry, including _A Dialogue on Love_.”

The event, titled “Fat Art Thin Art: Eve Kosofsky Sedgwick as a Poet,” will be held on 
Friday, February 14, from 1:00pm to 5:30pm in The Treehouse, Berrick Saul Building, on The University of York campus.

It will be preceded by an evening of poetry titled “A Lovely Dialogue: Critics and Poets, Friends and Fans” on Thursday, February 13, from 6:00pm to 7:30pm at the same location. 

“The evening will include a reading by Mary Baines Campbell, the author of two books of poems, _The World, The Flesh and Angels_ (Beacon, 1989) and _Trouble: Poems_ (Carnegie Mellon, 2003), as well as a leading scholar of Renaissance and Early Modern culture. It will also include a cast reading of Sedgwick’s Dr. Seussian queer bedtime story for children, 'Pandas in Trees.'”

Both events are free and open to the public. Refreshments will be served. For further information, please contact  jason.edwards@york.ac.uk.

_Image: Kissing from "Panda Wishes 4U" by Eve Kosofsky Sedgwick_