---
layout: book
published: true
nav: archive
category: writing
sub-category: "books edited"
type: book

role: editor
with: none
title: Gary in Your Pocket
sub-title: Stories and Notebooks of Gary Fisher
pub-date: 1996

editions:
    - description:  none
      publisher:    Duke University Press
      location:     "Durham, N.C."
      series:       Series Q
      date:         1996

amazon_url:          none
indiebound_url:      http://www.indiebound.org/book/9780822317999
worldcat_url:        none

cover_img:      garyinyourpocket.jpg
description:    none

display_data:
    - {k: title, v: Title}
    - {k: publisher, v: Publisher}
    - {k: publication_date,  v: Publication Date} 
    - {k: isbn,  v: isbn} 

---

The incandescent African American writer Gary Fisher was completely unpublished when he died of AIDS in 1994 at the age of 32. This volume, which includes all of Fisher’s stories and a generous selection from his journals, notebooks, and poems, will introduce readers to a tender, graphic, extravagant, and unswervingly incisive talent. In Fisher’s writings the razor-sharp rage is equalled only by the enveloping sweetness; the raw eroticism by a dazzling writerly elegance. Evocations of a haunting and mobile childhood are mixed in Fisher’s stories with an X-ray view of the racialized sexual vernaculars of gay San Francisco; while the journals braid together the narratives of sexual exploration and discovery, a joyous and deepening vocation as a writer, a growing intimacy with death, and an engagement with racial problematics that becomes ever more gravely and probingly imaginative.

A uniquely intimate, unflinching testimony of the experience of a young, African American gay man in the AIDS emergency, _Gary in Your Pocket_ includes an introduction by Don Belton that describes Fisher’s achievement in the context of other work by Black gay men such as Marlon Riggs and Essex Hemphill, and a biographical afterword by Eve Kosofsky Sedgwick. --_From the jacket copy_

"It is impossible to read Gary in Your Pocket and not marvel at [Fisher’s] talent.... Here is the unfolding world of a young gay man of the post-Stonewall generation, learning to embrace a gay identity with innocence and without shame.... _Gary in Your Pocket_ redefines the dimensions of African American literature. The body of black gay literature is all the more so enriched." --_Mark Haile, Lambda Book Report_

"The importance of Gary Fisher’s work cannot be overstated. Presenting a singular and now lost artist, _Gary in Your Pocket_ adds much needed insight into the forum of AIDS and sexuality. It will handily transcend any normal sense of audience or perceived notions of appeal." --Randall Kenan